Measure theory deals with the measure of subsets. On the real number line, we might define the measure of the subset to be the length, say from $[a, b]$ would be $b - a$. But we want to go farther from here. 



Look at an abstract set, $X$. We want to measure the volume of the subset. A measure is a map that goes from subsets to volumes. 

Start with the power set of $X$. For example, 


$$
X =\{a, b\}
$$
Then, 
$$
P(X) = 2^X = \{ \emptyset, X, \{a\}, \{b\} \}
$$


Now we can give a definition of measurable sets. So the idea is that not all sets are measurable. 



Let's look at some subset of the power set. $\mathcal{A}$ is called a sigma algebra, which is defined as the collection of all measurable sets.


$$
\mathcal{A} \sub P(X)
$$


1. $\emptyset, X \in \mathcal{A}$

2. $A \in \mathcal{A} \implies A^c \in \mathcal{A}$

   1. This makes sense, since we've defined the entire full set $X$ to be measurable. If $X$ is measurable and $A$ is also measurable, $X - A = A^c$ should also be measurable.
   2. $\mathcal{A}$, or sigma algebra, is closed under complements.

3. $A_1, A_2, \ldots \in \mathcal{A} \implies \bigcup  A_i \in \mathcal{A}$

   1. This is also an extension of the idea in (2). Namely, a union of countably many member of the sigma algebra should also be a member of the sigma algebra. This makes sense intuitively---a countably many union of measurable sets should also be measurable.
   2. $\mathcal{A}$, or sigma algebra, is closed under countable unions.

4. $A_1, A_2, \ldots, A_n \in \mathcal{A} \implies \bigcap \limits_{i=1}^n A_i \in \mathcal{A}$

   1. $$
      \bigcap \limits_{i=1}^n A_i = \left (\bigcup \limits_{i=1}^n A_i^c \right)^c \\
      $$

   2. $\mathcal{A}$, or sigma algebra, is closed under countable intersections.

In these context, $A$ is what we call a measurable set. To clarify once more, sigma algebra $\mathcal{A}$  is a set of sets whose elements $A$ are considered measurable. The largest $\mathcal{A}$ in this sense, is the full power set; the smallest sigma algebra, on the other hand, is the set containing just the empty set and the original set $X$ itself.

Now we can talk about the notion of a "sigma algebra that contains $\mathcal{M}$". Here, $\mathcal{M}$ is a member of the sigma algebra, *i.e.* it is a measurable set. What we want to know, then, is the sigma algebra generated by $\mathcal{M}$. In a way, we are imposing an additional constraint on the sigma algebra, effectively removing trivial measurable sets such as $\{ \emptyset, X \}$, which we noted earlier is the smallest sigma algebra possible.

Notationally, we can denote this as


$$
\sigma(\mathcal{M}) = \bigcap \limits_{\mathcal{M} \subset \mathcal{A}} \mathcal{A}_i
$$


Let's take a look at an example where
$$
X = \{ a, b, c, d \} \\
\mathcal{M} = \{ \{ a \}, \{ b \} \}
$$


Then, we can easily see that the smallest sigma algebra generated by $\mathcal{M}$ is
$$
\sigma(\mathcal{M}) = \{ \emptyset, X, \{ a \}, \{ b \}, \{ a, b \}, \{ b, c, d \}, \{ a, c, d \}, \{ c, d \}\}
$$


Now we can introduce the notion of the Borel $\sigma$-algebra, which is the sigma algebra generated by some open set $X$.