---
title: "Phone Calls and the Poisson Distribution"
last_modified_at: 2019-11-13 9:51:00 +0000
categories:
  - study
tags:
  - math
  - python
---

At the Yongsan Provost Marshall Office, I receive a wide variety of calls during my shift. Some of them are part of routine communications, such as gate checks or facility operation checks. Others are more spontaneous; fire alarm reports come in from time to time, along with calls from the Korean National Police about intoxicated soldiers who get involved in mutual assault or misdemeanors of the likes. Once, I got a call from the American Red Cross about a suicidal attempt of a soldier off post. All combined, I typically find myself answering about ten to fifteen calls per shift. 

But yesterday was a special day, a good one indeed, because I received only five calls in total. This not only meant that USAG-Yongsan was safe and sound, but also that I had a relatively light workload. On other days when lawlessness prevails over order, the PMO quickly descends into chaos--patrols get dispatched, the desk sergeant files mountains of paperwork, and I find myself responding to countless phone calls while relaying relevant information to senior officials, first sergeants, and the Korean National Police. 

So yesterday got me thinking: what is the probability that I get only five calls within a time frame of eight hours, given some estimate of the average number of calls received by the PMO, say 12.5? How lucky was I?

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

# The Binomial Distribution

One way we might represent this situation is through a [binomial distribution]. Simply put, a binomial distribution simulates multiple [Bernoulli trials], which are experiments with only two discrete results, such as heads and tails, or more generally, successes and failures. A binomial random variable $$X$$ can be defined as the number of success in $$n$$ repeated trials with probability of success $$p$$. For example, if we perform ten tosses of a fair coin, the random variable would be the number of heads; $$p$$ would be $$0.5$$, and $$n$$ would be $$10$$. 

Mathematically, the probability distribution function of a binomial distribution can be written as follows:

$$P(X = k) = \binom{n}{k} p^k (1 - p)^{n - k}$$

We can derive this equation by running a simple thought experiment. Let's say we are tossing a coin ten times. How can we obtain the probability of getting one head and nine tails? To begin with, here is the list of all possible arrangements:

```python
[['H', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T'], 
['T', 'H', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T'], 
['T', 'T', 'H', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T'], 
['T', 'T', 'T', 'H', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T'], 
['T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'H', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T'], 
['T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'H', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T'], 
['T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'H', 'T', 'T', 'T'], 
['T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'H', 'T', 'T'], 
['T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'H', 'T'], 
['T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'H']]
```
Notice that all we had to do was to choose one number $$i$$ that specifies the index of the trial in which a coin toss produced a head. Because there are ten ways of choosing a number from integers $$1$$ to $$10$$, we got ten different arrangements of the situation satisfying the condition $$X_head = 1$$. You might recall that this combinatoric condition can be expressed as $$\binom{10}{1}$$, which is the coefficient of the binomial distribution equation. 

Now that we know that there are ten different cases, we have to evaluate the probability that each of these cases occur, since the total probability $$P(X_head = 1) = \sum{n=1}^10 p_i = 10 \cdot p_i$$, where $$p_i$$. Calculating this probability is simple: take the first case, `['H', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T', 'T']` as an example. Assuming independence on each coin toss, we can use multiplication to calculate this probability:

$$p_1 = P(H) \cdot P(T) \cdot P(T) \cdot \dots P(T) = {\frac{1}{2}}^10 = 0.0009765625$$

Notice that $$P(H) = P(T) = \frac12$$ because we assumed the coin was fair. Had it not been fair, we would have different probabilities for $$P(T)$$ and $$P(H)$$, explained by the relationship that $$P(T) + P(H) = 1$$. This is what the binomial PDF is implying: calculating the probability that we get $$k$$ success in $$n$$ trials requires that we multiply the probability of success $$p$$ $$k$$ times and the probability of failure $$(1 - p)$$ $$n - k$$ times. 

# Attempted Application of the Binomial Distribution

Now that we have reviewed the concept of binomial distribution, it is time to apply it to our example of phone calls at the PMO. 










[binomial distribution]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binomial_distribution

[Bernoulli trials]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernoulli_distribution