---
title: First Date with Flask
toc: false
categories:
  - study
  - development
tags:
  - update

---

These past few days, I've been taking a hiatus from the spree of neural networks and machine learning to explore an entirely separate realm of technology: web development. Let me tell you why.

# A Failed First Attempt

I tried learning HTML, CSS, and javascript about a month ago. However, that didn't go as well as I had expected, mainly due to lack of momentum. HTML was easy: it was just a way of doing markups with tags. And as many people might agree, I didn't really think learning HTML was akin to learning a programming language. The process felt more similar to studying something like $\LaTeX$ or markdown. 

Then came CSS, which turned out to be a whole different animal compared to HTML. CSS seemed simple on paper: it was just a way of stylizing HTML code so that it looks more presentable. However, the whole madness of padding, margins, classes, and ids got me rethinking about my original assessment of CSS. I ultimately ended up glossing over CSS tutorials, thinking that knowing the barebone basics---what it does and how it does it---will suffice for now. 

As expected, learning javascript was more comparable to leanring Java or Python. This was mainly because javascript is, by most standards, a full-fledged programming language, featuring loops, conditional statements, variable declarations, and so on. Getting the basics was pretty easy for this reason: I was able to orient myself into programming mode and focus on learning the syntax unique to javascript. In many ways, javascript made me reminisce about Java, although there were several notable differences. This part was fun and easy. 

However, when the time came to pull everything back together, I was overwhelmed. The interaction between HTML, CSS, and javascript was interesting and all, but it was all too much for me to pick up in just a few days. Tired, I decided to return back to my comfort zone of Python and Jupyter Notebooks. 

Until two days ago.

I was reading about generative adversarial networks from the book [Generative Deep Learning](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/generative-deep-learning/9781492041931/) by David Foster when an idea struck me: it's great that we can build and train a neural network, but how do we present and deploy it in actuality? Shouldn't there be some means of delivering the model, preferably through something like an application or a website? I was able to find my answer in these questions in just a few minutes: either deploy a model by integrating it into a web application or use frameworks such as [TensorFlow.js](https://www.tensorflow.org/js). 

At this point, I realized that running into front-end work  is going to be unavoidable for me. Although I'd imagine machine learning engineers or data scientists typically don't work with web development to deploy models themselves, it is undeniable that proficiency in the front-end stack to some capacity is going to be helpful asset to have at one's disposal. I thus garnered the courage and motivation to start my journey again with web development. This time, I had a clear sense of goal and purpose: build a web application capable of using a trained neural network or machine learning model to generate predictions and present them in a visually effective way. 

# Flask Web Framework

Flask is a popular Python-based web framework used for web application development. 

## Python



## Back to HTML



## Bootstrap





## SQL







# To be Continued



















